# 3.1 Biometrics

_Source: Draft Commission guidelines on the classification of high-risk AI systems under Article 6 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 (AI Act) for stakeholder consultation — Annex III, Chapter 3, §3.1._

## 3.1. Biometrics

**(119)** Point 1 of Annex III AI Act lists three high-risk use cases covering AI systems intended to be used in the field of biometrics, in so far as such use is permitted under relevant Union or national law.

### 3.1.1.   Overview of use cases and horizontal issues

**(120)** Point 1 of Annex III AI Act includes the following use cases:

(a) Remote biometric identification (RBI) systems;

(b) AI systems intended to be used for biometric categorisation, according to sensitive or protected attributes or characteristics based on the inference of those attributes or characteristics; and

(c) AI systems intended to be used for emotion recognition.

**(121)** The aforementioned use cases are classified as high-risk given their potential intrusiveness on the rights and freedoms of the persons concerned by the systems, including because of the systems’ reliance on biometric data and their sensitive nature. As explained in Section 2.6 above, the fact that an AI system is classified as a high-risk AI system under these use cases should not be understood to mean that the use of the system is lawful under other acts of Union law or under national law compatible with Union law.

##### i.        Biometric data

**(122)** RBI systems involve the processing of ‘biometric data’. Article 3(34) AI Act defines ‘biometric data’ as ‘personal data resulting from specific technical processing relating to the physical, physiological or behavioural characteristics of a natural person, such as facial images or dactyloscopic data’.

**(123)** Personal characteristics from which biometric data may be extracted are physical, physiological or behavioural attributes of a natural person. Physiological and physical biometrics employ bodily, structural, and relatively static attributes of a person, such as their fingerprints, the pattern of their iris, contours of their face, or the geometry of veins in their hands. Some attributes are microscopic in nature, but still exhibit biological and chemical structures that can be acquired and identified e.g., DNA and odour9. Behavioural biometrics monitor the distinctive characteristics of movements, gestures, and motor-skills of natural persons as they perform a task or series of tasks. This means that human movements, such as walking (gait analysis) or finger contact with a keyboard (keystrokes), are captured and analysed. Behavioural biometrics encompass a variety of attributes that exhibit both voluntary and involuntary repeated motions and associated rhythmic timings or pressures of body features ranging from signatures, gait, voice, click patterns, and keystrokes, through to eye tracking and heartbeats10, electroencephalography (EEG)11, or electrocardiograms (ECG)12. The biometric input may relate to one attribute (e.g., facial images) or multiple attributes (e.g., facial information combined with electroencephalogram (EEG)). Biometric data referring to characteristics of natural persons cannot, as such, concern deceased individuals, dead bodies, human remains of deceased people or traces thereof.

For example, the following AI systems do not fall within the use case of point 1 of Annex III:

–    an AI system comparing DNA samples from a corpse;

–    an AI system comparing facial image from human remains;

Physiological and Behavioural Biometrics – Biometrics Institute, available online: https://www.biometricsinstitute.org/physiological-and-behavioural-biometrics/. Physiological and Behavioural Biometrics – Biometrics Institute; available online: https://www.biometricsinstitute.org/physiological-and-behavioural-biometrics/. See EDPS, TechDispatch 1/2024 – Neurodata, 3.6.2024, in which the use of brain data and related technology is discussed, as well as the legal implication, including the proposition of new ‘neurorights’, including mental privacy and integrity, In S. O’Sullivan, H. Chneiweiss, A. Pierucci and K. Rommelfanger, Neurotechnologies and Human Rights Framework: Do we need new Human Rights?, available online: https://rm.coe.int/rapporteur- report-neurotechnology-final-e-2758-7638-0166-1/1680a90ae0 Report, OECD and CoE, 9.11.2021, p.33 , a state of the art and legal aspects of neurotech is discussed. See Hasnul et al., 2021, Electrocardiogram-Based Emotion Recognition Systems and Their Applications in Healthcare, available online: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/15/5015.

–   an AI system comparing facial images, DNA, or fingerprints from a known deceased individual, coming from official register, including police records.

**(124)** AI systems intended to be used to search for objects that do not make use of biometric data to track the movement of a suspect, e.g. searches based on number plates, specific clothes, weapons, background, etc., will not be classified as high-risk pursuant to point 1(a) of Annex III AI Act.

Examples with regard to the element of biometric data:

–     An AI system inferring emotions of an individual from key stroke (way of typing), facial expressions, body postures or movements is based on biometric data.

–     An AI system following a person with a red scarf or a blue jacket is not based on biometric data.

–     An AI system used in supermarkets to detect whether a product is being put into a basket, cart or into a bag is not based on biometric data when it only performs object recognition. The same is true for a system used at train stations or airports that detects suspicious objects.

–     An AI system inferring emotions from typed text (content, sentiment analyses or stylometry) to define the style or the tone of a certain article is not based on biometric data.

**(125)** The AI Act’s definition of biometric data is broad and includes any biometric data used for biometric identification, biometric categorisation, emotion recognition or other purposes. Contrary to the definition of biometric data in the EU data protection law, including Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (‘GDPR’), Directive (EU) 2016/680 (‘LED’) and Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 (‘EUDPR’), the definition of biometric data in the AI Act does not include the wording ‘which allow or confirm the unique identification’ (the functional use of biometric data), since it aims to cover AI systems that use biometric data not only in cases where the AI system identifies an individual or confirms its identity as specified in Recital 14 AI Act.

##### ii.          Interplay with prohibited practices

**(126)** The use cases listed in point 1 of Annex III should be considered in the light of the AI practices prohibited by Article 5(1)(f), (g), (h) and (2) to (5) AI Act. That is because, in specific instances where all the conditions for one or more prohibited practices under Article 5 AI Act are met, the placing on the market, putting into service and use of the AI system is prohibited. It will then be unnecessary to consider whether those systems should be classified as high-risk. Most AI systems that fall under an exception from the prohibitions provided in Article 5 AI Act will qualify as high- risk.

For example, emotion recognition systems, where they do not fulfil the conditions for the prohibition of Article 5(1)(f) AI Act, will fall within the use case of point 1(c) of Annex III AI Act and be classified as high-risk pursuant to Article 6(2), insofar as the conditions under Article 6(3) AI Act do not apply. In particular, emotion recognition systems outside the areas of workplace and education institutions, as well as such systems used in the areas of workplace and education institutions, when used for medical or safety reasons, are not prohibited, but qualify as high-risk.

Similarly, biometric categorisation systems that do not fulfil the conditions for the prohibition of Article 5(1)(g) AI Act will fall within the use case of point 1(b) of Annex III and be classified as high-risk pursuant to Article 6(2) AI Act, where they are intended to be used for biometric categorisation according to sensitive attributes or characteristics protected under Article 9(1) GDPR (insofar as the conditions of Article 6(3) AI Act do not apply).

In contrast, RBI systems that fall within the use case of point 1(a) of Annex III AI Act may in some cases be prohibited if they fulfil the conditions for the prohibition under Article 5(1)(h) AI Act, i.e. they are being used in real-time, at publicly accessible places, for law enforcement purposes, and without one of the exceptions applying. Conversely, RBI systems that fall under one of the exceptions of Article 5(1)(h) AI Act13 will be classified as high-risk under Article 6(2) AI Act, as will RBI systems that are not used for law enforcement purposes or not in real time.

### 3.1.2.   Point 1(a): Remote biometric identification systems

**(127)** Point 1(a) of Annex III classifies RBI systems as high-risk. Such systems are deemed worthy of high-risk classification, since technical inaccuracies in the system may lead to biased results and entail discriminatory effects (especially on the grounds of age, ethnicity, race, religion or belief, gender, sexual orientation or disabilities) and RBI may lead to the feeling of surveillance and have a chilling effect on the exercise of fundamental rights, such as the freedom of expression and the freedom of assembly and association.

**(128)** The two subsections below describe (i) the scope of the high-risk use case point 1(a) of Annex III and (ii) the requirements for authorisation of certain law enforcement uses of post RBI systems under Article 26(10) AI Act.

#### 3.1.2.1. Remote biometric identification system

**(129)** Article 3(41) AI Act defines an RBI system as ‘an AI system for the purpose of identifying natural persons, without their active involvement, typically at a distance through the comparison of a person’s biometric data with the biometric data contained in a reference database’. An AI system must therefore fulfil three conditions to be classified as an RBI system: (i) its purpose must be biometric identification; (ii) that identification must occur without the active involvement of the person concerned, typically at a distance; and (iii) the system must perform a comparison between that person’s biometric data and biometric data contained in a reference database. Each of these conditions is described in more detail in subsections below.

##### i.          Biometric identification system

**(130)** Biometric recognition systems can be used for verification (authentication) and identification purposes14. Such systems always rely on biometric data to perform such verification and identification. They detect, capture, and transform measurable physiological and physical

The exceptions set out in Article 5(1)(h)(i)-(iii) AI Act aim to allow the use of certain AI and investigative tools for law enforcement purposes: (i) the targeted search of victims of three specific serious crimes and missing persons [protection]; (ii) the prevention of imminent threats to life or physical safety or a genuine threat of terrorist attacks [prevention]; and (iii) the localisation or identification of suspects and offenders of certain serious crimes as listed in Annex II AI Act [prosecution/investigation]. As defined in Article 3(36) AI Act, and agreed by the biometrics community in ISO/IEC Standard 2382- 37:2022 Information Technology - Vocabulary, Biometric recognition, Term 37.01.03.

characteristics (such as eye distance and size, nose length, etc.) or behavioural characteristics (such as gait or voice) into machine-readable biometric data (see Section 3.1.1.i) above). Those data are available in different forms (images or templates), which are a mathematical representation of the salient features of an individual, used for verification and identification purposes.

**(131)** Article 3(35) AI Act defines ‘biometric identification’ as ‘the automated recognition of physical, physiological and behavioural or psychological human features for the purpose of establishing the identity of a natural person by comparing biometric data of that individual to biometric data of individuals stored in a database.’ Such identification can be done for a variety of private or public sector purposes. Regarding law enforcement, such identification is typically done in view of an action or decision to be taken by either administrative, law enforcement or judicial authorities.

**(132)** This definition excludes systems whose intended purpose is not to establish the identity of a natural person and systems which do not compare the biometric data of a natural person to biometric data stored in a database. Processing of biometric data that is not done for the purpose of identifying persons do not constitute biometric identification (e.g. collecting additional information or establishing links between criminal cases based on biometric samples).

**(133)** AI systems may be used for biometric identification in all stages of activities. For example, biometric identification includes ‘initial identification’ as used in Article 26(10) AI Act (see Section

#### 3.1.2.2. below). Biometric identification can also cover establishing the identity (including, but not

limited to, the civil identity) of a natural person whose identity is already known or previously verified by a human.

**(134)** An AI system that locates an individual does not necessarily constitute an RBI system. Where the system does not rely on biometric features to locate a person (or there is no comparison of the biometric data of that person with biometric data stored in a reference database), that system will not be classified as high-risk pursuant to point 1(a) of Annex III AI Act.

For example, the following AI systems are not considered biometric identification systems:

–   AI systems automatically searching for non-biometric identifiers (including logos on clothing, specific items).

–   Automated number plate recognition (ANPR) systems when used for locating a motorised vehicle by the means of the car number plate, by the shape, the make or the colour of the vehicle, related to a person of interest (e.g. missing persons, persons suspected of having committed a crime, subject to a European arrest warrant).

–   AI systems automatically searching occurrences of the validation of the individual’s transport tickets (e.g., to establish the movements of the suspect). The ‘tracking’ is done based on the individual’s validations of a ticket/subscription and not based on biometric data.

–   AI systems used to geolocate a picture involving criminal activities (such as CSAM) based on background or unique identifiers in the picture excluding biometric data.

**(135)** By contrast, AI systems intended to be used to track natural persons (e.g., to determine the direction in which a suspect is moving or escaping in the view of taking a possible coercive action) are covered by the definition of biometric identification, provided the ability to track a person relies on a biometric data and a comparison is made of the biometric data of that person with biometric data stored in a reference database. This conclusion can be deduced from the meaning of Article 5(1)(h)(iii) AI Act and Article 26(10) AI Act. Article 5(1)(h)(iii) AI Act allows the use of real-time RBI for the tracking of suspects of crimes. Article 26(10) AI Act refers to the targeted search of a person suspected or convicted of having committed a criminal offence (see also Section 3.1.2.2. below), provided all other conditions for such use are met (see also Section 3.1.2.2. below).

For example, the following AI systems are considered biometric identification systems:

–   Automated comparison of biometric identifiers (combination of face, height, frame, hair / eye colour, gait allowing the unique identification of a person) of one or several persons suspected of committing a crime with a live CCTV stream (when exempted from prohibitions in Article 5(1)(h) AI Act under one of the limited exceptions) or with CCTV recordings analysed after the crime and matched against a reference database of biometric templates of known convicted criminals.

–   An AI system that uses gait recognition to compare the known fugitive’s stored biometric gait profile of an individual against CCTV footage feeds collected from main transport hubs close by to track the individual after a first detection on the reference material.

–   An AI system is deployed during a major event (e.g., sport event, political gathering) to detect the presence of specific known individuals linked to terrorist groups in specific sites using biometric data stored in law enforcement systems (when exempted from prohibitions in Article 5(1)(h) AI Act under one of the limited exceptions).

**(136)** AI systems that are intended to be used for biometric verification fall outside the scope of the high- risk classification15. Biometric verification (including authentication) consists of comparing biometric data presented at a sensor with another set of previously provided biometric data stored on a device, such as a smartphone, a passport, or an ID card or stored in a database in an encrypted form while the decryption key is solely stored at the individual’s end, e.g., on a smartphone (one- to-one verification). The sole purpose of biometric verification is to confirm that a specific person is who they claim to be.

For example:

– An AI system that compares an image of a traveller’s face (facial image) captured at an automated border control gate with the facial image stored in their passport’s chip to confirm that the holder is the legitimate document owner would not be considered RBI system. If, however, within the same scenario the biometric data of the traveller captured

Annex III, point 1(a) AI Act.

at the border is in addition to the verification purpose simultaneously compared against a criminal database, for example by Interpol, this would be RBI. –   An AI system comprising a mobile fingerprint scanner used to compare a live fingerprint against fingerprint templates stored on the persons’ electronic ID card or driver’s license for the purposes of checking their identity (e.g., a municipal employee or law enforcement officer requests individuals to place their finger on a mobile fingerprint scanner to verify their identity). Such system would not be considered an RBI system.

##### ii.        Remoteness

**(137)** According to Article 3(41) AI Act, remoteness implies the ability of an AI system to identify an individual without their active involvement, typically at a distance.

**(138)** Point 1(a) of Annex III explicitly excludes from high-risk classification AI systems intended to be used for biometric verification the sole purpose of which is to confirm that a specific natural person is the person he or she claims to be. As clarified in Recital 15 AI Act, this may include a biometric system that confirms the identity of a natural person for the purpose of allowing them to have access to a service, unlock a device, or have security access to premises16.

For example, the following would not be considered an RBI system

–    An AI system using face scanning technology to admit entry to a restricted area (e.g. power plant premises): such a system compares the face of the individual presented at the entrance camera with a reference image contained in a reference database of persons allowed to enter the building (one-to-many).

–    An AI system using smartphone facial authentication linked to a person’s digital ID wallet to access an online police reporting portal: such a system compares the biometric sample stored in the digital ID wallet with the biometric data captured by another device to confirm the user’s claimed identity before allowing the submission of the report.

**(139)** Recital 17 AI Act clarifies that the exclusion of biometric verification and authentication systems from the definition of RBI systems is justified by the fact that such systems are likely to have a minor impact on the fundamental rights of natural persons, as compared to RBI systems, which may be used for the processing of the biometric data of a large number of persons without their active involvement. That recital further clarifies that RBI systems are typically used to perceive multiple persons or their behaviour simultaneously to facilitate the identification of natural persons without their active involvement.

**(140)** For active involvement to be present, it is insufficient that persons on whom a biometric identification system is used are informed of such use. Rather, they need to actively participate in its use, for example, by actively and consciously presenting themselves in front of a sensor that is installed in a way to foster active participation.

E.g. Ross A, Jain AK (2015) ‘Biometrics, Overview’ in Li S.Z. and Jain A.K. (eds) Encyclopedia of Biometrics, (1st ed. Springer Science, New York), pp. 289-294.

For example,

–   An AI system used to give access to a metro station, such as biometric metro tickets, whereby persons are actively involved and consciously approach the biometric sensor to obtain access, does not fulfil the condition of remoteness.

–   In contrast, an AI system used in cameras installed on the walls or ceilings of metro stations for surveillance purposes fulfils the condition of remoteness, since the persons on whom the system is used are not actively involved in their identification process.

–   An AI system used for law enforcement purposes using the biometric data of a person included in evidence taken from a crime scene (e.g., finger latent) without the presence of that person (or with their presence, but where the person is unconscious) does not constitute active involvement.

–   Following an arrest, a suspect is taken into police custody. In accordance with applicable national criminal procedural law, officers capture the suspect’s facial photograph as part of the standard custody processing procedure, uses an AI system to compare a ‘mugshot’ taken during this formal identification procedure against a database of biometric templates. The system does not qualify as an RBI system as it is not remote (there is active involvement of the suspect).

–   An AI system used by law enforcement whereby a witness offers to verify their identity by capturing their fingerprint and comparing it solely against the biometric template stored on the person’s electronic ID card constitutes active involvement.

–   An AI system used by a public authority to check the identity of individuals through facial recognition, against a predefined watchlist of persons suspected of involvement in terrorism. The AI system is used for the purposes of granting them entry to a restricted and fenced security perimeter within an otherwise publicly accessible space (e.g. a city square) during a major public event. Individuals wishing to enter the secured perimeter are informed in advance, through visible notices and public communication, that entry is subject to biometric checks and the facial recognition scanner is positioned to require conscious participation (e.g. standing within a marked capture zone and facing the sensor) to gain entry to the secured area. Such involvement would be considered active involvement.

**(141)** Biometric identification systems that process (also contactless, i.e., without physical contact) fingerprints, gait, voice, DNA, keystrokes and other (biometric) behavioural signals may also constitute RBI systems, provided they fulfil the condition of remoteness described above17. Palm scanning systems will mostly constitute biometric verification or authentication systems. However, in certain cases, palm scanning systems may also be used for identifying a suspect, for example when comparing child sexual abuse material to see whether the same offender is involved.

For example, the following biometric identification can be considered remote:

EDPB-EDPS, Joint Opinion 5/2021, p. 11; Council of the European Union, ‘Opinion of the Legal Service’, 12302/22, 12 September 2022, paragraph 33, and Recital 15 AI Act.

–     A biometric identification technology system that captures voice samples may be deployed on a person who is speaking by using a microphone to collect a biometric sample.

–     A gait recognition system may be used via closed-circuit television (CCTV) and the videos automatically checked for matches with previously captured templates.

–     Keystroke biometric technology may be used for finding a person typing a fraudulent message by matching the person’s distinctive typing rhythm with previously captured keystroke templates.

**(142)** Body-cams used by individual law enforcement authorities for the purposes of, for example, the untargeted filming of a demonstration with hundreds of participants, will be considered to fulfil the condition of remoteness. RBI systems used in the virtual space may also be considered to fulfil that condition where the system typically functions at a distance without active involvement.

##### iii.         Reference database

**(143)** Biometric identification is not possible without a reference database containing biometric data for comparison purposes for identifying natural persons. Thus, the existence of a reference database is indispensable to perform remote biometric identification of a person. A reference database may consist of biometric data of one or many individuals.

**(144)** Biometric identification against a reference database requires that the comparison is carried out against all data records containing biometric references18.

For example,

–     The Automated Fingerprint Identification System of SIS (SIS-AFIS)19 database could be used as a reference database to carry out dactyloscopy searches.

–     A national missing persons database could be used as a reference database for facial recognition in case of missing persons.

–     A private company’s voice database could be used as a reference database.

#### a) Practical examples of AI systems falling within the high-risk use case of point 1(a)

–     Facial/voice recognition for media archives: AI-enabled facial and voice recognition technology intended to be used to identify selected individuals (e.g., public figures) from

In line with ISO/IEC 2382-37. Article 42, 43 of the Regulation (EU) 2018/1862 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 November 2018 on the establishment, operation and use of the Schengen Information System (SIS) in the field of police cooperation and judicial cooperation in criminal matters, amending and repealing Council Decision 2007/533/JHA, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1986/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Commission Decision 2010/261/EU and Article 32, 33 of the Regulation (EU) 2018/1861 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 November 2018 on the establishment, operation and use of the Schengen Information System (SIS) in the field of border checks, and amending the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, and amending and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1987/2006.

audiovisual content by comparing that content against a reference database, such as media archives maintained by public broadcasters and national audiovisual repositories, without the individuals’ active involvement.

–    (Voice)print matching in databases: AI-enabled solutions intended to be used to analyse recordings or voiceprints to identify individual speakers, by comparing their biometric data against an established database of known individuals and voiceprints without their active involvement.

–    CCTV cameras installed in the walls and/or ceilings of a stadium (post remote): If an incident happens during a match, the captured biometric data (i.e. facial images) is compared to a biometric database to identify offenders, without the active involvement of visitors to the stadium.

–    An AI system intended to be used to identify, from an image taken from a CCTV camera installed on private property, an individual suspected of carrying out a burglary and operating without their active involvement. Unlike the prohibition in Article 5(1)(h) AI Act, the high-risk use case listed in point 1(a) of Annex III is not limited to RBI in publicly accessible spaces.

–    AI systems intended to be used to compare child sexual abuse material (CSAM) found on the Internet to an established national or international database of suspects containing facial images and tattoos to identify an offender without their active involvement.

–    An investigation requiring the identification on the internet, via backwards search (reverse image searches), of a terrorist living undercover, without his or her active involvement: A reference database can be a transformation of biometric template(s) taken from information available on the website or the Internet in general.

–    An AI system intended to be used to compare attributes in a picture, e.g., taken from the Internet or CCTV, with pictures taken from the Internet and indexed in a database (a reference database can be a transformation of biometric template(s) taken from information available on the website or generally the Internet) to identify the person in the picture without their active involvement.

#### b) Practical examples of AI systems falling outside the high-risk use case of point 1(a)

–    A CCTV facial recognition system at the entry to a stadium to detect blacklisted individuals forbidden to enter the stadium via direct access control: such a system would not fulfil the condition of remoteness, because natural persons need to actively participate, i.e., actively step in front of the AI system to get access to the stadium.

–    AI systems intended to be used for biometric verification (authentication) or for identification that is not remote, such as:

o    AI based solutions to unlock a smartphone.

o    AI-based solutions to streamline the onboarding experience for the purposes of identifying traders.

o    AI-based solutions for the authentication of online exam proctoring (so-called remote proctoring).

o    AI-based solutions to streamline access to a service (e.g., logging in to a bank account online (login authentication) or calling customer service of a bank to receive information about specific transactions).

o    AI-based solution to carry out verification of identity during a roadside check by law enforcement. Officer uses a mobile device to compare the person’s live fingerprint solely against the fingerprint stored on the ID card to verify the person’s identity.

–   AI systems for smart homes/residential areas: An AI system intended to be used to authenticate or verify the identity of an individual to give access to a home or residential area by scanning facial images, irises, voice (voiceprint identification), or fingerprints at the entrance and which grants access after a successful check against a reference database made up of biometric data which the relevant individual agreed to register, would be considered to be for biometric verification purposes and would not be considered to fulfil the condition of remoteness (the individual agreed to register and consciously presents themselves at the entrance).

–   Smart corridor AI biometrics system: an AI system that captures the facial images of individuals from several angles in a short corridor or passage and compares those images against a biometric database of persons that have registered with the system through which those persons can enter a concert, stadium, major public event at a city square, etc., without stopping, whereas unregistered persons are approached and ejected by security staff or by automatic door systems, depending on the application. Such systems are used solely to gain access to a service/premises and persons that registered would be considered to actively participate in the identification.

–   AI systems intended to be used to confirm the identity of a natural person for the sole purpose of having access to a service, unlocking a device or having secure access to premises: e.g., an AI-enabled facial recognition system to contol access to hazardous areas (e.g., used in industrial settings to grant or deny access to machinery or areas with elevated safety risks); an AI-based solution to control physical access to secure areas within a corporation’s office buildings; an AI biometric system for secure facility access used in critical electricity infrastructure or seaport/river port facilities (employees/authorized personnel only). –   AI systems that make use of biometric data, but which are not intended to be used for biometric identification: e.g. an AI system that uses a voice sample collected with the individual’s active involvement to carry out language/dialect analysis in order to identify the country and region from where a person originates in the context of migration and asylum processes. The aim of such a tool is not to identify the person. Rather, a voice sample is matched against a pool of accredited voice samples to substantiate country of origin. However, see Section 3.1.3 on Point 1(b) and Section 3.7 on Point 7 of Annex III below.

–   AI systems filtering seized material to structure its content: e.g. the AI system filters the seized footage, e.g., 100 000 files, in preparation for the evaluation of the seized evidence, e.g., whether there is a child present in a photo or not.

–   AI systems used by law enforcement authorities to analyse crime scenes: All kinds of material are collected from a crime scene including CCTV, witnesses’ material, etc. The objective is to gain investigative insights in what has exactly happened by analysing occurrences of persons and objects (e.g. via clustering, tracking or localisation based on objects such as cars, number plates, clothes, bags, weapons, drugs, and possibly as well for faces, tattoos and birthmarks). Persons are not matched against external databases, i.e. their identity is not established; and only material that has a direct link to the crime place is being used. This is the work-step prior to initial identification, and even if there might be a comparison of faces involved, in view of the closed dataset this would not yet be subject to the high-risk classification under Article 6(2) and Annex III, point (1)(a) AI Act.

–   AI systems that use multispectral imaging to capture information from the surface and sub-surface (dermis) of the skin (collecting of biometric data) to capture fingerprints without carrying out biometric matching against a reference database.

–   AI systems used solely for cybersecurity and personal data protection purposes: e.g. AI systems with the sole purpose of anonymising personal data, such as biometric systems which are intended to be used solely for the purpose of enabling cybersecurity and personal data protection measures as indicated in Recital 54 AI Act.

–   AI systems that use cameras (e.g., satellite, infrared/thermal) to detect the presence of humans, such as:

o    AI systems that provide information on seat occupancy in trains or counting people: the AI system uses infrared thermal cameras installed on the ceiling in the train compartment; captures the temperature for each of the seats; and analyses the data and provides updates to the passenger via website/mobile application.

o    AI systems that are used to detect people on tracks (trespassers) to prevent accidents and damages to the infrastructure: the AI system uses infrared thermal cameras installed around rail tracks, in front of the train, etc.; alerts driver/security team that there are trespassers.

o    AI systems using images or recordings of specific spaces captured by cameras carried by drones/satellites to verify whether there are any humans present in those spaces based on non-biometric data (e.g., unusual motions, radio frequency signals emitted by the electronic device carried by humans) in the search for missing people (e.g., people lost in vast uninhabited spaces, for instance large forests). Although such AI systems can be used to identify individuals, they do not involve biometric data.

o    AI systems that use infrared thermal cameras to detect the presence of humans are not classified as high-risk AI systems because their purpose is not to identify

individuals, but instead to detect the mere presence of humans20. In addition, such systems do not rely on biometric data.

–    AI systems that do not track an individual on the basis of biometric data: e.g., law enforcement uses AI video analytics tools to track a fleeing suspect across cameras based on clothing colour and body outline, without extracting or matching biometric features.

–    AI-based large data processing systems used by law enforcement to cross-check and identify links between various criminal cases on the basis of facial imagery without using biometric data to identify the common suspects.

#### 3.1.2.2. Authorisation requirement for certain law enforcement uses of post

RBI under Article 26(10) AI Act

**(145)** Article 26(10) AI Act consists of seven subparagraphs that concern three specific situations21. Subparagraphs 1 and 2 contain a specific authorisation requirement for deployers of post-remote biometric identification (post-RBI) systems used for the targeted search of a person suspected or convicted of a crime in the framework of an investigation. Subparagraphs 3 to 6 contain general rules and procedural requirements directed at deployers of any high-risk post-RBI system used for any law enforcement purpose, including for the remote identification and localisation of offenders, the search for missing persons, and the prevention of crimes. Subparagraph 7 authorises Member States to introduce more restrictive laws on the use of post-RBI.

#### a) Subparagraphs 1 and 2 of Article 26(10) AI Act

**(146)** The use of a high-risk AI system for post-RBI for the purpose of law enforcement, in the framework of an investigation for the targeted search of a person suspected or convicted of having committed a criminal offence, requires the deployer (generally, a law enforcement authority) to ask for an authorisation by a judicial authority or by an administrative authority whose decision is binding and subject to judicial review. The authorisation requirement does not apply to all RBI systems classified under Point 1(a) of Annex III AI Act. As mentioned above, the scope of its application is narrowed down to specific situations in the framework of an investigation for the targeted search for law enforcement purposes.

**(147)** The term ‘targeted’ in ‘targeted search’ relates to the question whether the law enforcement authority has reasonable cause to suspect a connection between a suspect and a crime and is therefore searching for that suspect. Once this has been established, the law enforcement authority may use the most efficient RBI search method in view of the concrete situation. It may run, for example, probe or gallery searches, depending on the concrete circumstances. The term ‘search’ in

However, in the context of migration, asylum and border control management, an AI system that uses infrared thermal or satellite imaging to detect people crossing a border in an unauthorised place would fall under the use case of point 7(d) of Annex III AI Act (Section 3.7.5 below). Beyond the specific deployer obligations under Article 26(10) AI Act, any high-risk post-RBI system also needs to comply with the requirements for high-risk AI systems and all obligations applicable to providers who place them on the market or put them into service, other obligations on the deployer, such as human oversight and monitoring etc. (Article 26), the obligation to conduct Fundamental Rights Impact Assessment (Article 27) or to provide for a right to an explanation of decisions (Article 86) also apply. These other obligations and requirements will be clarified in other set of guidelines that the Commission is preparing in 2026.

‘targeted search’ relates to the objective of identifying the location in time and place of the targeted individual.

**(148)** A search for a person may be targeted whether the identity of the person is known or unknown. A search can be considered targeted where there is a reason to search for a specific person. The suspect must be directly linked to a criminal offence as a suspect or convict.

Example of targeted searches:

–    Following an armed robbery, investigators obtain CCTV images and identify a known individual, already present in police records, as the prime suspect. Authorities run a post- RBI query using the suspect’s facial template to determine whether the person appears in footage from nearby transport hubs at that moment. The search is targeted as the search is narrowly focused on the one individual, and there is a direct link to a concrete criminal offence.

–    A witness to a kidnapping provides investigators with video showing the suspect’s face. Police extract a biometric template from the footage and run a post-RBI search to determine whether that same individual appears in footage captured by other cameras along the suspected escape route.

On untargeted search see paras. 159-160 below.

**(149)** The initial identification of a potential suspect, based on objective and verifiable facts directly linked to an offence, is excluded from the authorisation requirement under Article 26(10) AI Act. The AI Act does not define when a person is considered a suspect, but in the context of Article 26(10) AI Act this should be understood to mean persons who are reasonably believed by law enforcement authorities to have committed a criminal offence. The suspicion of the law enforcement authorities must be based on objective and verifiable facts. Initial identification relates to the identification of one or several potential suspects against a reference database to find out their identity or to establish the existence of a matching biometric profile in a reference database, without necessarily establishing the suspect’s identity. The question is: Who is the person (that is a potential suspect?). Examples are the comparison of a suspect’s biometric data against biometric templates of known persons, for instance from police files or EU information systems. The objective can be to find out the likely identity of the suspect (e.g. score 8/10 that this is Person A) or to find out whether the suspect has already previously committed crimes or was a suspect (this is a person whose biometric traces were already found previously at a crime scene; this is a person whose biometric profile is already on a reference database). In other words, initial identification is not necessarily aimed at establishing the civil identity of a person. In the case of initial identification, the system needs to comply with the requirements for high-risk AI systems, provided that the AI system constitutes a remote biometric identification system and therefore classifies as high-risk (see Section 3.1.2.1. above). No specific authorisation is needed for the initial identification of a potential suspect based on objective and verifiable facts directly linked to the offence.

Examples of initial identification:

–    After a stabbing, investigators obtain clear CCTV footage showing the perpetrator’s face. Police generate a biometric template and compare it against national police and EU

databases to determine whether a matching biometric profile exists and to identify the likely person.

–   Following a burglary, police extract a facial image of the perpetrators from CCTV and compare it against biometric traces previously collected from other crime scenes to determine whether the same individual may be involved in multiple offences.

–   After a terrorist incident, investigators obtain video showing one perpetrator but cannot yet confirm his or her identity. Post-RBI is used against police databases to produce ranked candidate matches (e.g. ‘likely person A’) to which other pieces of evidence must be corroborated to identify the person.

–   Searches carried out within reference databases, including police records, and public or private video surveillance camera systems, by comparing a given biometric sample of an individual, such as (a) pictures of the face, of tattoos, or any other identifiable body part, (b) gait, (c) voice, collected from the following sources and in the following situations (i) from video surveillance cameras, (ii) from human remains, whereabouts or traces notably from unknown persons, (iii) from unconscious persons, (iv) from social media, (v) from seized material, (vi) when taken in custody with coercion, (vii) from legal interception for the first identification in the context of an active search of a person. Examples of initial identification include:

–   Airport authorities searching their video-surveillance camera system for the presence (the location) of a given person on the basis of pictures collected from social media, upon the request of national law enforcement authorities searching for that individual. However, upon a match in the system, further searches in the system for the individual and for the same purpose of searching this suspect are not considered to be initial identification.

–   Member State B law enforcement authorities consulted by Member State A law enforcement authorities as part of a police cooperation information exchange for the first time in the context of an active search of a person suspected of having committed a crime and searching for the identity of a person in the criminal database is initial identification.

–   A search carried out in another Member State’s national criminal database through the Prüm II framework with latent fingerprints or latent palm prints, or with facial images collected on a crime scene, with the aim of identifying the suspect subject of an active search.

–   Europol searches in Member States’ database under the Prüm II framework with fingerprints or facial images received from third-country authorities for establishing the identity of the individual actively tracked until a match occurs .

–   Europol, while supporting Member States active search for a given individual suspect of having committed a crime under Europol’s mandate investigation comprising several ATM attacks, carries out comparisons in its own data on the basis of footage from the local surveillance camera. Such processing for identification purposes are considered initial so long as the person is not identified. Further identifications with the same sample

into Europol data and with the same purpose of searching that suspect, and potentially revealing the presence of the person in a new setting, cannot be considered initial.

**(150)** The authorisation for a targeted search is required when the investigation has been narrowed down from a broader number of persons of interest to a limited number of suspects and this is reflected in some formal status of an open investigation for a crime. This will normally be the case when there is a formal investigation under national law and a certain (official) procedure (of search) for the specific suspected person (who is known) is being initiated. The question is: Where is the suspect? Location of the person in time and place is an essential component of targeted searches carried out in the framework of investigations. The targeted search for a person in the context of Article 26(10) AI Act refers to the use of RBI systems to track an individual. For example, in the course of an investigation the law enforcement authority has considered that Person B is the likely offender of a crime that has taken place. A post-RBI system is being used to analyse CCTV footage and video material that was collected around the crime scene (i.e. link to the location and time of the offence) to find out where the suspect came from or went to in the view of taking possible law enforcement actions against that person with possible consequences on the rights and freedoms of the person concerned. A template with the biometric data containing a single picture or audio recording of the suspect could be considered a ‘reference database’ in this context and would be compared to the collected CCTV and video material.

For example, the prior authorisation by a competent judicial authority or an administrative authority pursuant to Article 26(10) AI Act would be required for:

–   Repeated post-RBI queries to map movements of an identified suspect. Authorities repeatedly run post-RBI across multiple reference databases to reconstruct the movement of a suspect whose identity is already known in view of arresting that person; location in time and space of the person, even in the past, will help authorities to establish roadblocks at kilometric distance compatible with the time elapsed from the moment when the person appeared on the footage.

–   Evidentiary confirmation for prosecution. Post-RBI is used specifically to produce confirmation that a known suspect appears on the crime-scene at a certain moment in a footage for evidentiary use.

**(151)** Targeted search includes finding out the location of concrete suspects. ‘Localisation’ is not a defined term under the AI Act. Localisation that is not based on biometric data is outside the scope of the AI Act’s rules on biometrics, for example when following a person with a red scarf.

**(152)** Law enforcement authorities frequently use AI systems for the analysis of a crime scene. In such cases, the AI system is used as a screening tool for analysing large amounts of footage material for the purpose, for example, to investigate the course of events. All kinds of material are collected from a crime scene including CCTV material, etc. The objective is to gain investigative insights into what has exactly happened by analysing appearances of persons and objects. Persons are not matched against external biometric databases, and only material that has a direct link to the crime scene is being used. The use of the system is focused on understanding the movements of the persons present around the crime scene. This is a work-step prior to initial identification, and even if there might be comparison of faces or other biometric features involved, in view of the closed

dataset, this would not be considered RBI and high-risk. The same logic can be applied for AI systems used for screening child sexual abuse material (CSAM) that do not screen biometric data of individuals for identification purposes.

**(153)** Localisation that is based on biometric data is considered falling under the definition of biometric categorisation when persons are not being searched on the basis of biometric templates that allow their identification, but for example based on their eye or hair colour or their height (e.g. a search for a suspect described by witnesses as a skinny woman, mid-thirties, 160-165 cm, light skin, dark hair, brown eyes, leaving the surrounding of the crime scene). The AI system is sorting and filtering footage to flag persons that fall within this category. Pure searching for occurrences based on biometric characteristics – without establishing biometric templates that allows the identification is not considered RBI.

Examples of AI systems that are not considered RBIs:

–   Filtering persons by hair and eye colour after a crime was committed. Witnesses describe the suspect as having dark hair and brown eyes. Investigators use AI to sort crime-scene footage to categorise persons matching these physical traits. This is not necessarily biometric identification, but may amount to biometric categorisation if the sorting is based on biometric data.

–   Age-range estimation for investigative triage. An AI system groups individuals appearing in crime-scene footage into approximate age brackets to support manual review.

**(154)** The objective of requiring authorisation for the use of a post-RBI system for the targeted search of a person suspected or convicted of having committed a criminal offence is the need for an assessment and a decision as to whether the envisaged use of the AI system for the purpose is strictly necessary for finding the person in the context of the investigation of a specific criminal offence. This necessity assessment must take account of the personal, temporal and geographic scope of the targeted search and assess whether there are not less intrusive means for finding the person in question. The condition of strict necessity is assessed for each concrete case by the law enforcement authority intending to deploy the system. The authorisation request can be linked to the opening of an investigation or the request for other surveillance measures according to national law to streamline procedures.

**(155)** According to Article 26(10), subparagraph 1, AI Act, the request must be made ex ante or without undue delay and no later than 48 hours after starting the use of the post-RBI system.

**(156)** The authorisation must be requested from a judicial authority or an administrative authority whose decision is binding and subject to judicial review. The obligation to request an authorisation solely applies to the targeted search of a person suspected or convicted of having committed a criminal offence in the framework of an investigation. This excludes, for example, the targeted search for missing persons or victims (no authorisation is needed) or searches outside the framework of an investigation of a crime (e.g., law enforcement use a biometric template of a known child sexual abuse victim to identify whether images/videos featuring the same child come up in other unrelated reports of child sexual abuse or to search for the appearances of a picture of a witness of a crime scene in an indexed version of social media, e.g. scraped material, on the basis of the witness driver’s license mugshot). Depending on national law, the authoritsation granted by the judicial

authority or administrative authority may concern a particular person or a specific group of persons suspected of having committed or convicted of concrete criminal offence(s) in the context of a specific investigation. It may not be necessary to know the civil identity of the person(s).

**(157)** The authorisation procedure required by Article 26(10) AI Act can be designed with sufficient flexibility to also cover unforeseeable operational scenarios and the screening of large data volumes, for example CSAM. In case of CSAM the search for victims would not be subject to an authorisation requirement. Neither would the sorting and filtering of data be relevant. The authorisation requirement would apply only in the case of a specifically targeted search against a concrete suspect (unless it is an initial identification). Without prejudice to the independence of the judiciary and to national procedural law and practices, and to facilitate the implementation of this requirement and make it operational, Member States could consider relying on the judicial authorisation procedures that are currently established for compliance with other Union or national laws, e.g., concerning an authorisation for the interception of communications.

**(158)** If the requested authorisation is rejected, the use of the post-RBI system shall be stopped with immediate effect and the personal data linked to the use of the high-risk AI system for which the authorisation was requested must be deleted. This does not imply that a standard reference database is to be deleted, but only personal data that is specific to the investigation. This requirement applies to the results of the processing of CCTV or video material, such as biometric profiles and identifications or links made through comparison of the material with reference data. It does not apply, for example, to the CCTV material itself, where this material has been lawfully obtained.

**(159)** In no case shall post-RBI be used for law enforcement purposes in an untargeted way, without any link of a specific person to a criminal offence, a criminal proceeding, a genuine and present or genuine and foreseeable threat of a criminal offence, or the search for a specific missing person (Subparagraph 3). That applies universally, also to cases of post RBI use of systems for law enforcement purposes when there is no requirement for an authorisation for the targeted search of persons in the framework of an investigation as set out under Article 26(10), subparagraph 1, AI Act.

**(160)** Recital 95 AI Act further specifies that ’[p]ost-RBI systems should always be used in a way that is proportionate, legitimate and strictly necessary, and thus targeted, in terms of the individuals to be identified, the location, temporal scope and based on a closed data set of legally acquired video footage. In any case, post-RBI systems should not be used in the framework of law enforcement to lead to indiscriminate surveillance. The conditions for post-RBI should in any case not provide a basis to circumvent the conditions of the prohibition and strict exceptions for real time remote biometric identification.’ Use cases are different and depend on the concrete situation. Compliance with the condition of strict necessity for the investigation of a specific criminal offence must be assessed and demonstrated by the law enforcement authority intending to deploy the system. This can also apply to intelligence operations, if they are carried out for the purpose of law enforcement and are not exclusively for national security purposes.

Examples of untargeted searches include:

–   Police run facial recognition across all persons appearing in city-center CCTV over a weekend, without searching for a specific person in mind, to detect possible offenders.

–   Police deploy a post-RBI system after a public demonstration happened to scan all persons appearing in footage from a public square where the demonstration took place, without having previously identified a specific suspect or concrete individual linked to an offence.

–   Authorities regularly check public space (e.g. transport hubs) video feeds using facial recognition to detect any persons of potential interest, without a time-bound or crime- linked investigative purpose.

#### b) Subparagraph 3 of Article 26(10) AI Act

**(161)** Article 26(10), subparagraph 3, AI Act provides that no decision that produces an adverse legal effect on a person may be taken by the law enforcement authorities based solely on the output of a post-RBI system. This restriction comes on top of the requirement under Article 14 AI Act for human oversight. Further analysis to inform a decision can, for example, relate to the question whether a given person has been at a different place or also whether there are other reasons why the person cannot be the subject of a search22.

#### c) Subparagraph 4 of Article 26(10) AI Act

**(162)** Article 26(10), subparagraph 4, AI Act confirms that the requirements in Article 26(10) AI Act are without prejudice to Article 9 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Article 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680 for the processing of biometric data.

#### d) Subparagraphs 5 and 6 of Article 26(10) AI Act

**(163)** According to Article 26(10), subparagraphs 5 and 6, AI Act, deployers of post-RBI systems must document each use of such systems in the relevant police file and make the documentation available upon request. Furthermore, they must proactively submit annual reports (that may be aggregated to cover more than one deployment) to the relevant market surveillance authority and the national data protection authority, excluding the disclosure of sensitive operational data related to law enforcement.

e) Subparagraph 7 of Article 26(10) AI Act

**(164)** Pursuant to Article 26(10), subparagraph 7, AI Act, Member States may introduce, in accordance with Union law, more restrictive laws on the use of post-RBI systems.

### 3.1.3.   Point 1(b): Biometric categorisation

**(165)** Point 1(b) of Annex III classifies as high-risk AI systems intended to be used for biometric categorisation according to sensitive or protected characteristics based on the inference of those attributes or characteristics. Such systems are deemed worthy of high-risk classification since they

More details on human oversight in the context of RBI under point 10.2.2.5. of the Commission Guidelines on prohibited artificial intelligence practices established by Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence and amending Regulations (EC) No 300/2008, (EU) No 167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 2018/1139 and (EU) 2019/2144 and Directives 2014/90/EU, (EU) 2016/797 and (EU) 2020/1828 (Artificial Intelligence Act) (Text with EEA relevance) (OJ L, 2024/1689).

involve the processing of additional sensitive personal data and pose significant risks to other fundamental rights of natural persons, such as the right for private and family life, non- discrimination, and human dignity.

**(166)** Article 3(40) AI Act defines a biometric categorisation system as ‘an AI system for the purpose of assigning natural persons to specific categories on the basis of their biometric data, unless it is ancillary to another commercial service and strictly necessary for objective technical reasons’. The biometric categorisation of an individual by an AI system is thus typically the process of establishing whether the biometric data of an individual belongs to a group with some pre-defined characteristic. It is not about identifying a specific individual or verifying their identity, but about assigning an individual to a certain category. The notion of ‘biometric data’ is explained Section

### 3.1.1. above.

**(167)** Biometric categorisation may rely on categories of physical characteristics (e.g. facial features and form, skin colour) based on which persons are assigned to specific categories. Biometric categorisation may also be based on DNA or on behavioural aspects, such as keystroke analysis or a person’s gait23. Biometric categorisation excludes categorisation according to clothes or accessories, such as scarfs, hats, gloves, watches or crosses, as well as social media activity.

**(168)** If a system is ‘ancillary to another commercial service and strictly necessary for objective technical reasons’ it will fall outside the scope of the definition of biometric categorisation systems. Recital 16 AI Act explains that a purely ancillary feature is a feature that is intrinsically linked to another commercial service, meaning that the feature cannot, for objective technical reasons, be used without the principal service, and the integration of that feature or functionality is not a means to circumvent the applicability of the rules of the AI Act.

##### i.    According to sensitive or protected attributes or characteristics

**(169)** According to point 1(b) of Annex III AI Act, only AI systems intended to be used for biometric categorisation according to sensitive attributes or characteristics will be classified as high-risk, in so far as those systems are not prohibited under the AI Act. Recital 54 AI Act clarifies that sensitive attributes or characteristics are those protected under Article 9(1) GDPR. They include attributes and characteristics on ‘racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade union membership, genetic data, biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying a natural person, data concerning health or data concerning a natural person’s sex life or sexual orientation.’ The placing on the market, the putting into service for this specific purpose, or the use of biometric categorisation systems that categorise individually natural persons based on their biometric data to deduce or infer their race, political opinions, trade union membership, religious or philosophical beliefs, sex life or sexual orientation are prohibited by Article 5(1)(g) AI Act. Therefore, the attributes and characteristics of ethnic origin, genetic data, and data concerning health are here of key relevance.

##### ii. Biometric categorisation must be based on the inference of those attributes or

characteristics

**(170)** To be classified as high-risk, the AI system must use biometric data to infer a sensitive or protected attribute or characteristic and then classify the individuals according to that attribute or that

See e.g., the Article 29 Working Party, Opinion 3/2012 on developments in biometric technologies, WP193, 27.4.2012, pp.16-17. The Group refers here to ‘soft recognition’ (p. 17), i.e. ‘detection of behaviour or specific needs of people’.

characteristic. This means that biometric data must be used as an input, while a sensitive or protected attribute or characteristic is the output of the AI system inferred from the biometric data.

#### a) Practical examples of AI systems falling within the high-risk use case of point 1(b)

-    An AI system to categorise patients. The AI system is used to detect early symptoms of diseases that manifest themselves in mobility issues. The AI system captures patients’ gait, infers their health data based on captured gait data, and assigns those individuals to pre-defined categories (e.g., early stages, advanced stages of diseases).

-    AI system to categorise passengers. The AI system is used in cameras installed at the airport to analyse passengers’ movement between terminals. The AI system captures travellers’ biometric data (e.g., gait, facial templates), infers biometric identifiers based on these captured data, and uses them to assign travellers into a category. Initial categorisation is based on inferred biometrics, e.g., ethnic origin. These categories are used, for example, to generate aggregated passenger profiles (e.g., solo passenger, passengers travelling as a family) or to support targeted operational measures.

#### b) Practical examples of AI systems falling outside the high-risk use case of point 1(b)

-    AI system to categorise foreign persons crossing the EU border. The AI system is used in cameras installed at border crossing points and captures facial images to infer foreigners’ age and gender. The system is not high-risk because attributes such as age and gender are not considered as sensitive or protected under Article 9(1) GDPR. If age and gender are collected for the purposes of assessing the risk posed by foreigners entering into the EU territory, the AI system could be qualified as a high-risk system under point 7 (b) of Annex III, AI Act.

-    AI system to categorise customers based on their gender to offer/improve personalised experience for customers. The AI system captures keystrokes, analyses them to assign a gender to the customer to offer/improve personalized experience (e.g., personalised advertising). The AI system deploys biometric categorisation (assigns a customer to a certain category based on their biometric data). However, the AI system infers gender, which is not a sensitive or protected attribute or characteristic under Article 9(1) GDPR.

-    AI systems intended to be used for age estimation. The AI system prevents minors from, e.g., (i) accessing online harmful content, (ii) accessing age-restricted services (such as online betting, personal loans, credit cards, investment platforms, mobile payment wallets), (iii) accessing physical premises not appropriate for children, or (iv) using vending machines that provide products intended exclusively for persons over a legally defined age threshold (e.g., tobacco). The AI system captures keystrokes or/and facial features through a camera and assigns individuals to a specific age group on the basis of a comparison of the captured images/keystrokes patterns with characteristics of people in certain age groups and a probability prediction. The AI system infers age, which is not sensitive or protected attribute or characteristic under Article 9(1) GDPR.

-    AI system intended to be used as a content moderation tool. The AI system scans text/pictures to identify illegal or inappropriate content. Although the system categorises content based on specific indications (e.g., extreme content that may reveal political opinions and be considered

as a sensitive or protected attribute or characteristic), that categorisation is not made on the basis of biometric data.

### 3.1.4.   Point 1(c): Emotion recognition

**(171)** Point 1(c) of Annex III classifies emotion recognition systems as high-risk. Article 3(39) AI Act defines ‘emotion recognition systems’ as AI systems ‘for the purpose of identifying or inferring emotions or intentions of natural persons on the basis of their biometric data’.

**(172)** Serious concerns exist about the scientific basis of AI systems aiming to identify or infer emotions or intentions, particularly since the expression of emotions vary considerably across cultures and situations and even within a single individual. Emotion recognition systems are intrusive and present key shortcomings that may affect individuals’ fundamental rights. Among the key shortcomings of such systems are their limited reliability, their lack of specificity, and their limited generalisability.

**(173)** While language-based AI social companions are not specifically classified as high-risk under the AI Act, it cannot be excluded that, in certain cases, they might be intended to be used for emotion recognition (identifying and inferring emotions or intentions based on biometric data from, e.g., voice or video calls) and therefore fall to be classified as high-risk pursuant to point 1(b) of Annex III AI Act.

##### i.   Identification and inference of emotions or intentions

**(174)** The identification of emotions or intentions occurs where the processing of the biometric data (for example, the voice or a facial expression) of a natural person allows to directly compare and identify an emotion or intention with one that has been previously programmed in an emotion recognition system. Inferring occurs by deducing information generated by analytical and other processes by the system itself. In such a case, the information about the emotion is not solely based on data collected on the natural person, but is inferred from other data, including machine learning approaches that learn from data how to detect emotions or intentions24. Inferring generally encompasses identifying (of emotions or intentions) as a prerequisite, so an AI system intended to be used for inferring emotions or intentions should be understood as also identifying emotions or intentions25.

##### ii. Emotions or intentions

**(175)** The concept of emotions or intentions should be understood in a wide sense and not interpreted restrictively. Recital 18 AI Act provides some clarifications on this concept, listing emotions ‘such as happiness, sadness, anger, surprise, disgust, embarrassment, excitement, shame, contempt, satisfaction and amusement’. These examples are not exhaustive.

See Recital 12 AI Act. Inferred data is hence also often the result of probability-based analytical (big data) processes aimed at finding correlations and finding patterns in data sets. Recital 18 AI Act.

**(176)** The AI Act should not be circumvented by referring to attitudes and therefore the high-risk use case in point 1(c) of Annex III includes cases where an AI system is intended to be used to find, based on biometric data, that a person is showing, for example, an angry attitude.

**(177)** Recital 18 AI Act clarifies that emotions or intentions do not include ‘physical states, such as pain or fatigue, including, for example, systems used in detecting the state of fatigue of professional pilots or drivers for the purpose of preventing accidents’ (for example, identifying whether a person is sick is not emotion recognition). It further clarifies that emotion recognition systems do not include ‘the mere detection of readily apparent expressions, gestures or movements, unless they are used for identifying or inferring emotions’. Those expressions can be basic facial expressions, such as a frown or a smile, or gestures such as the movement of hands, arms or head, or characteristics of a person’s voice, such as a raised voice or whispering. However, when these readily apparent expressions or gestures are used for identifying or inferring emotions or intentions, they are covered by the concept of ‘emotions or intentions’.

#### a) Practical examples of AI systems falling within the high-risk use case of point 1(c)

-    The integration of AI with body-worn cameras or remote surveillance systems (so-called police bodycams): e.g. AI-enhanced body-worn cameras used across patrol units that enables automated behavioural pattern detection, flagging ‘aggressive posture’ through gait, body posture, movement and facial analysis to assess whether an individual is likely to engage in fight during police encounters. This qualifies as an emotion recognition system because it interprets physical cues to infer an individual’s emotional or mental state - in this case, anger.

-    An AI system for the gaming industry that is intended to measure a gaming experience to further improve the product (real-life gaming experience). The AI system tracks body posture, facial expressions, eye closures and gazes to measure the reaction of the player, including their excitement, anger, frustration, amusement; analyses the above-mentioned recorded data to identify relevant elements of the gaming experience that needs improvement. Such a system involves processing of biometric data (e.g., facial expressions which are a source of biometric data). It also identifies or infers gamers’ emotions based on their biometric data. Excitement, anger, frustrations are examples of emotions.

-    An AI-based solution to maintain order during concert events. The AI system is installed in cameras at walls or ceilings; screens the mood of the audience, e.g., voices, faces and movements; when the system finds that the mood is getting aggressive in a certain area of the stadium, more security personnel is sent to that area. The AI system is intended for emotion recognition: it screens emotions of individual participants to assess the mood of the audience.

-    An AI system used in call centres to infer emotions of customers. The AI system analyses customers’ voices and evaluates vocal tone, pitch and volume to gauge customer satisfaction level for statistical reasons, to identify the moment to route them to a human agent (e.g., anger), for troubleshooting purposes, or to enhance customer care business unit. These AI systems deduce from the customer’s voice their emotions, e.g., if they are happy or angry. It does not matter whether the biometric system is intended to identify the customer.

-    Smart watch mood monitor/wearable device. The AI system is integrated into a smart watch to measure biometric data (e.g., voice, heart rate) and monitor user emotions (e.g., sad, curious,

happy, bored) to assist users in recognising their emotional state and provide emotional improvement suggestions. Such AI systems infer user emotions, which is intrusive. It is not relevant whether the emotion recognition results are disclosed solely to the specific user.

#### b) Practical examples of AI systems falling outside the high-risk use case of point 1(c)

-     An AI system intended to be used by the automotive industry to help prevent accidents by detecting when a driver loses focus (i.e., drowsiness, falling asleep, experiencing sudden health issues). The AI system tracks body posture, facial expressions, eye closures and gazes via installed cameras and motion detectors in a vehicle; analyses the collected data to alert the driver or assume control of the vehicle, and safely bring it to a stop. Such AI systems are not considered high-risk AI systems because emotions or intentions do not include pain or fatigue, which are physical states.

-     The observation of readily apparent expressions. The mere observation that a person is smiling is not emotional recognition. A TV broadcaster using a device that allows to track how many times its news presenters smile at the camera is not emotion recognition.
